[Music]
thank you and thank you for the
introduction uh the invitation to come
and speak with you today um I'm going to
try to keep this relatively brief for
the schedule but I want to at the same
time introduce you uh or to introduce
talk a little bit about this uh the
stack this book we just published last
uh last month MIT press was uh 500 pages
in 20 minutes so we'll see if we can get
through this but um you know philosophy
end up not working it's at least you can
weaponize it in other other more direct
more direct ways and this is as well um
the work just very briefly is sort of a
in very interdisciplinary sort of mix of
geopolitics design Theory and computer
science um it's also sort a mix of of of
analytical theoretical work and
something that I think it was more of a
kind of multiscalar
uh infrastructural design brief um
that's meant to be uh responded to more
directly it also is meant to propose in
a way a kind of model of totality of of
a big picture of the whole something
we've perhaps not so good at um anymore
um and it's also at least within the the
specific problem of political science um
in relation to some of the things that
metah haven is dealing with in this book
who also did the cover by the way um
political science I think in many ways
does doesn't have a very good way it
doesn't have very good ways of dealing
with uh computation as a topic or
subject matter it tends to sort of see
it as something that is to be governed
or something to be designed but not not
as the actual form of governance itself
and so that's part of what we're trying
to shift here um I suppose in another
way perhaps in contrast to some um first
talk this morning it's it's not really
not a utopian or distopian story I think
it's sort of a bit of both um and
hopefully in some interesting and
overlapping ways
okay so very quickly um the two key
arguments about planetary scale
computation that the book tries to
develop is one that it distorts and
deforms modern West fallan Logics of
political geography and it creates new
territories in its own image second that
the various genres of computation uh of
smart grids Cloud platforms mobile apps
smart cities Internet of Things
automation should be seen not so much as
a as a b so many species
evolving out on their own but as
something that is forming a coherent
whole an accidental Mega structure
called the stack that is both a
computational apparatus and a new
governing architecture at the same time
we are in it and it is in us and so the
architecture of this model U treats
these overlapping layers it's their
claims and networks not as exceptions to
the to the normal but exceptions to the
rule but as the basis of a of a emergent
order and so it and as as I'll very
quickly go through in the structure of
this talk comprises these six
interdependent layers of Earth Cloud
City address interface and user but
first what do I mean exactly by this um
West folian political geography well um
in a sense we can say that the modern
nation state was among other things a
function of a particular kind of
cardgraphic projection that conceived of
the Earth as a horizontal plane filled
with various allotments of land in which
individual Sovereign domains were
circumscribed and this topology um
became um the standard form of uh its
the geom the geometries of of of the
political that would exist um in its in
its wake but those Loops that Loop
topology gives way now to another kind
of topology in geography one not of one
that is built of multiple totalities at
once layered on top of one another not
one final last instance sovereignty but
multiple totality some some State based
some EXT state-based some Global some
Regional some Modern some archaic all
claiming the same site or person a bit
of data all at once and it's not that
somehow the state goes away into into
this virtualizes in some way just as
Cloud platforms come to take on more
roles traditionally assigned to Modern
States so to the inverse that states
themselves evolve into Cloud platforms
and so in regard to the Alec Ross and
Jared cohens of the world the the
geopolitical domain is not as they say a
chessboard with 196 pieces one for each
country rather it's a stack more like
196 squared heterogeneous jurisdictions
while fighting it out one amongst the
other and so the earth layer to start
with we assume that computation was
discovered at least as much as it was
invented the first part and that the the
stack as a whole draws upon the the the
that computational capacity of the world
its energy and its mineral resources in
order to compose itself and to drive the
power of the layers
above pulling not just silicon but all
other sort of matter of chemistry and
energy including the various het
heterogeneous minerals pulled from the
Mountain Streams of central Africa the
stack terraforms its host Planet by
drinking and V vomiting its Elemental
juices and spitting up mobile
phones the shiny surfaces of our
handsets demand Gore to feed the gloss
of its
face one of the problems I think
sometimes in talking about there's a
presumption is that some weren't talking
about digital or computational
Technologies they we're talking about
something virtual or ephemeral
immaterial the sack and the cloud in
particular is is incred is a physical
heavy hungry Beast long ago past the
airline industry and it's total carp
footprint but it's also something that
we use in order to optimize and gain
efficiencies in the types of energy that
through networked electrons that it's
possible to use to sustain our system so
and this is becomes the race can we
build the stack fast enough to save us
from the cost of building the
stack um this conundrum was made clear
to me a couple years ago and I was on a
panel with a guy Stanley Williams from
HP who was um part of a panel by then
vice president Gore had had commissioned
to try to to hypothesize what was the
architecture of a computer that could
model the entire world's climate in real
time what would it take to do this and
they came up with some estimates which
zetabyte computations a few orders of
magnitude more than what we have but the
other sort of more anticlimactic aspect
of this was that it was theoretically
possible to build such a computer but it
would be roughly the size of
Paris and it would be the single most
significant anthropogenic energy event
that it itself would be
modeling which is in a nutshell the
accident
the accident of the earth layer itself
so to the
cloud the cloud we sometimes think about
these things as you know placeless
virtual geography and something cloud is
in no way places it has a geography it's
just a very weird one the platforms of
the cloud layer are structured by dense
plural and non-contiguous geographies a
hybrid of USA super jurisdiction and the
charter cities which would carve new
partially privatized publics from the
whole cloth of Des Sovereign lands it's
not a matter of borders just
disappearing or virtualizing it's more
the multiplication exponential
multiplication of borders on one on top
of
another this larger geographical
geopolitical drama is seen perhaps most
explicitly in the ongoing soog Google
conflicts of 2008 to the present China
hacking Google Google pulling out of
China the NSA hacking China the NSA
hacking Google Google ghost writing
books for the state department Google
wordlessly circumventing the last
instances of State over site altogether
not by transgressing them but by
absorbing them into its service offering
meanwhile Chinese router firmware bides
its
time and so between the hackers of the
PLA and Google there's more than I think
a standoff between the proxies of two
State apparatuses there there it is in
said two geometries of territory one a
subdivision of the horizontal the other
a stacking of vertical layers one EST
State the other a parate one super osed
on top of the other at any point on the
map never resolving into some consensual
cosmopolitanism the city
layer some designers Architects let's
say may see software as something added
onto space um they see the idea of smart
cities as stupid because it assumes that
cities are not already intelligent and
they are right some designers
programmers let's say may see cities as
modules of Hardware that fit together
one one at a time into into that Mega
structural Matrix and they too are right
and so one mode of design is necessarily
nested in the other and in that Nest
Homo Sapien comes equipped with an
extraordinary array of sensory faculties
which as we may see are augmented
further by synthetic layers in various
ratios ranging from the sensors and
trackers in our phones that we carry
about like mules to the more intimate me
media of artificial images and sounds
situating ourselves in this expanded
field we are both sensors and
sensed on the one hand we are a primary
Sapient actor in this drama supervising
an orchestra of sensing Technologies
each individually capable of functional
processing and together of certain forms
of intelligence as our for example
neurons or other cells on the other
we're not only the subject of the
scenario we are also its subject matter
that wider Urban landscape of synthetic
sensory systems is not only a platform
through which we extend and extrapolate
our capacities for for
abstraction it is also capable of other
sorts of abstractions on its
own and so cities defined in this way
with perspectives mixed from public from
perhaps public health planning and
supply chain Logistics uh our
infrastructure for both living and
non-living matter to consume itself and
for some forms of matter to achieve and
hone sentient intelligence which in turn
remakes cities in its own image in
short we should imagine something like
an AI urbanism a bit like a stroll into
the field populated by mutually
oblivious little life worlds or in terms
of like the world of the tick the latter
waiting laying in weight for some
threshold event to come its way at which
point it triggers its programmed
responses at and into the void its own
little void into which it
leaps many of our own many of our Urban
sensors and their limited forms of AI
work similarly and perhaps with similar
nobility more versatile synthetic
intelligences occupy more complex umelt
some are Predator some are prey some are
in motion some are flowering some
pollinating and as we stroll among them
we may be registered by them or we may
be ignored we may be the primary cause
of concern or we may be a passing
interference in an evolutionary dynamic
in which we are neither protagonist nor
Target and so through this nesting the
city layer of the stack is then also the
home for an urban scale AI a co-mingling
of diverse sensors of light and air and
sound and chemistry drawing a land scape
of sensing and thinking little species
partially embodied discreetly one with
another and partially co- embodied one
with another as their information inputs
are aggregated and modeled and act upon
acted upon in various
pluralities the AI City may be embodying
itself but not as humans
do and so it's not just the AI in the
city but nested AI embodied as the city
with very different kinds of organ
organism to population to genome to
Niche to signal morphologies at
work the work of abstraction then for
art in design urbanism is then not just
to
employ deploy abstract forms but to set
in motion mechanisms and programs that
are capable of their own Feats of
abstraction and to calibrate how they
abstract us and one another
accordingly the address layer very very
quickly swirl just a bit closer to the
top of our stack image we see that any
instance singular or plural of matter
particle or wave or relation is
potentially identified by Massive
Universal addressing systems in which
mapping and linking tool provide for
avagadro's number of addresses allotted
to every user the global credential of
the address then subdivides these
heterogeneous territories hard and soft
herian space and carbon space into
disintegrated communicative arrays an
atmospheric Metropolis built of Digit
strings or something to appear to the
stack that is it must be addressed its
position is then both a mapping problem
and a set theory
problem IPv6 for example as we know
allows in principle something like
128bit address string something like 10
to the 23 addresses per person
uh obviously not entirely in in
exploring sort of what the granularity
material granularity of this would imply
um my lab at UCSD a few years ago we
were interested in in how small of an IP
address could you uh could you make if
if in principle you you know you're
working down to a granularity of cells
and molecules of what could be addressed
can we actually even write an address at
this scale and so you would need the
finest Point pen um that there is um and
so we wrote this IP address with
electron leth graphy beam into a silicon
wafer uh photographed it with scanning
electronic microscope the the address in
the picture is about 10 micrometers in
width which is about the size of a red
blood cell um each digit about uh 40 to
50 nanometers in
thickness but obviously actually in
terms of we'd have to go much smaller
than this in terms for it to really work
practically for nanom medicine and
things the
interface we could Define an interface
basically in in general sense is as as
any point of contact between two complex
systems which governs the condition of
exchange between those systems are our
predominant genre of the interface for
today is the graphical user interface
buttons with words on it and so we've
become in one way or another a species
of button pushers it's how we interact
with the stack and how the stack
interacts with
us the complexity of the stack all the
things that you might do with it and it
might do with you through any one
interfacial point is too complex to
comprehend and so we require by
necessity these synthetic summary maps
of all of the possibilities which are
those interfacial diagrams they show us
where things are and what can be done
with them they provide both
signification and a framing of
significance in this regard and so as
the interfaces multiply one on the other
they assemble into interfacial regimes
which present and enforce these
diagrammatic total images and for and
frame how it is the platform can work
for any user who perceives that platform
through the grammar of this
regime it's for to shifting to AR and VR
and AR in particular I I I fear that
ultimately a less um secular danger than
pervasive advertising is latent in AR
and that its most killer app may not be
marketing but fundamentalist
religion AR promises the design of a
kind of differential sacrality whereby
the black white black versus white
theolog ological segmentation of the
polus into friend and enemy becomes a
direct literal annotation onto the life
world the subtitling of perception of
into things into clean and unclean ours
and theirs sacred and profane Rebel and
Empire forces orc and not orc red team
blue
team but that's not the only path uh we
might take it also may allow for forms
of empathetic cinematic co-experience we
can scarcely imagine today allowing for
Co embodied users across locations and
for the induction and deduction of far
more complex energy flows such as
between energy and currency um into more
of a matter of course there's a sort of
quick shout out to this because we have
c um company of uh that I'm involved
with a startup from our lab UCSD called
nanov VR um it's a vr-based
nanoengineering design platform that
allows you to draw upon existing GE
geometric structures um with a very
accurate molecular Imaging geometries or
start from scratch to build atom by atom
uh new proteins molecules and to
simulate their interactions uh was
developed as I said lab UCSD with the
scripts Research Institute molecular
Graphics Laboratory um what principle
allow anything that involves
visualization of of complex interactions
at this scale and not just for
scientists it starting with table of
elements instead of the brick anybody
who could build 3D in Minecraft um can
now make complex nanobiotechnological
forms in VR and so the script Kitty
Extinction event is
nigh uh lastly to the
user we require I think um a rather more
fundamental and difficult I'm sure
redefinition of the political
subjectivity of the user in relationship
to its real operations because what it
does what we already do with it let
alone what it's going to do is much
weirder than our current vocabulary will
allow
for and that's because platforms and I
argue that the stack is a platform not a
platforms are Stacks platforms don't
ultimately care if a user is animal
vegetable or mineral all users have
platform
sovereignty in in security speak a user
is credentialed by three qualifications
something you know like a password
something you are like a fingerprint and
something you have or something you have
like a key card and so if someone or
something can be have and or no it can
be a user a trading algorithm driverless
car a sun poier AR a chemical reaction
triggering a threshold event in an
environmental sensor embedded on a leaf
in a rainforest all users platforms
don't care if the state sees you as an
illegal immigrant or if the market sees
you as an
externality and so while this stages a
certain kind of death of the humanist
user in one sense the eclipse of a
certain Resolute humanism it does so
because it also brings the
multiplication and proliferation of
other kinds of non-human and inhuman or
exoh human users including sensors and
alcos and robots from nanometric to
landscape
scale any combination of which one might
enter into in relationship as part of a
composite user any of us that
is which brings us of course to alphao
and deep dream
um the most interesting I think sort of
challenge of the latter is is not just
to sort of you know admire its handiwork
but also to sort of empathetically
attempt in a way to see as it sees and
to think of AI in a way that goes beyond
the the kind of Turing test prejudices
of assuming that an AI is is
recognizably intelligent to the extent
that it will perform intelligence in the
way in which humans think that humans
think um also we could say that if deep
dreams images are artifacts of the
computer's hallucinations of phantom
conclusions then the conspiratorial
figure cut by the evil Google stepfather
is perhaps that same paranoid Vision
turned inside out and back on
itself perhaps Google the AI is as
paranoid in how it sees us as some of us
are in how we see it it's not
coincidental then that as AI matures its
own pattern recognition faculties would
would reach the plateau of a creative
apophenia so important to our own
pattern uh our own Evolution and pattern
recognition now dealing with the fact
that the platform user position
undermines the Primacy of hu human
agency will inevitably drive uh strong
push back one can expect the push back
to be in some ways as fervent as it is
irrational there are some affinities
with Technologies however fictitious or
bizarre they may be
that are thought to embody the essence
of a creationist order one of these is
food especially for the left um or
Personal Mastery over equipment and
among these is the car and I I based on
some conversations with some colleagues
I've You Know spoken with at uh um
working on various autonomous vehicle
projects uh and from the legal
standpoint I I don't think it would be
so surprising if we were to a movement
to identify hum driven automobiles as a
type of arms and that the Second
Amendment to the Constitution now used
to Shield gun owners from obvious
liabilities and to protect their owner's
sense of personal Dominion will be flown
to keep human beings behind steering
wheels your life may be ended by someone
encased in a two-ton steel box careening
down the asphalt Vista trying to prove a
point about how technology will never
capture his natural
Humanity I'll conclude then with some
thoughts then as I said on the stack we
have in a bit on what I in the book
called The the black stack um the
generic figure for all of the alternate
totalities to come um Stacks are of
course designed to be have the
everything to be replaced on each later
they are modular they are a kind of
thesis Paradox
infrastructure the the stack we have is
that's that's defined not only by its
form its layers and platforms and their
interrelations but also by its its
content and is now painfully clear leak
after leak that its content is also the
content of our daily
Communications now weaponized against
us still cernic traumas that abolish the
false centrality and specialness of
human thought and species being are
Priceless
accomplishments and the Advent of robust
inhuman Ai and the geopolitics that
could ensue from it were we willing to
compose it will provide for a similar
disenchantment ments ones that should
enable a more reality based
understanding of ourselves or situation
and a Fuller and more complex
understanding of what intelligence is
and is not from there we can hopefully
make our world with a greater confidence
that our models are good approximations
of what's out there always a helpful
thing that is to say the
anthropos is not just about the reign of
humans it's about a reign of a
particular kind of humanism
and to survive it we must graduate
beyond the notion I argue that human The
Human Experience of Human Experience is
a the Central purpose of a world given
there for us and B something that is
separate from our own biotechnological
evolutionary emergence which is of
course
ongoing and it and so my critique then
is not of humans my is I say some of my
best friends are humans it's um it's of
the it's of the a particular human
hangover a folk psychology that weaves
fake asceticism populist solipsism and
various naturalistic fallacies into a
political
Aesthetics to me it is the theologic
expression of a mode of global dwelling
that sees the world as here for us and
this to me this human exceptionalism is
the exact recipe of the anthropic
scine and it what it um it makes it far
too difficult
uh for us to see that the geodesign
project that we really have at our on
our table more as is what it should be
it it is more like Molecular Gastronomy
at landscape scale a restored and
resorted ecology designed to taste
itself in new forms of richly spiced and
imaginatively Sauced Mutual
ingestion and per then our specific
situation if if the panopticon effect is
when you don't know you are being
watched or not and so behave as if you
are then the inverse panopticon effect
is when you know you're being watched
but act as if you
aren't this is today's surveillance
culture exhibitionism in bad
faith the emergence of Stack platforms
doesn't promise any solution or even
distinctions between friend and enemy
and within this Optics when considered
versus the Google caliphate perhaps the
NSA may even come to be seen by some as
the public option at least it's
accountable and principle to some
parliamentary limits they may say rather
than merely stakeholder avarice and
flimsy user
agreements if we take 911 in the roll
out of the Patriot Act as year zero for
the USA's massive data Gathering
encapsulation and digestion campaign one
we're only now beginning to comprehend
even as parallel projects in China and
Russia and Europe come to light then we
should imagine the entirety of network
communications for this last decade the
big
Hall as a single deep and wide digital
simulation of the world or a significant
section of it it's an archive a library
of the
real its existence as the perin property
of the state just as a physical fact is
almost Ault
almost the Geo philosophical profile of
the big hle from the energy necessary to
preserve it to its governing
instrumentality understood as a as a a a
text a very large text and as a machine
with various utilities overflows the
traditional politics of software its
story is much more borase than Lawrence
leig and its fate is as well can it be
destroyed is it possible to delete this
simulation and is is it even desirable
to do so is there a trash can big enough
for the big
delete even if the plug could be pulled
on all future data Halls stopping it
immediately surely there must be a
backup somewhere The Identical double of
the simulation such that if we delete
one the other will be forever haunting
history until it's rediscovered by
Future AI archaeologists interested in
their own Paleolithic Origins
would we bury it even if we could would
we need signs around it like those
designed for the yucka mountain nuclear
waste disposal site warning off
unknowable future
excavations those of us lucky enough to
be alive during this 15year span would
enjoy then a certain illegible
immortality curious to whatever
metacognitive entity pieces us back
together by our online activities both
public and private proud and furtive
each of us Rising back centuries from
now each of us a little aimus of cat
videos and
PornHub for some dramas but hopefully
not for the fabrication of the stack to
come black or otherwise a certain
humanism and a companion figure of
humanity still presumes its traditional
place in the center of the
frame we must let go of the demand that
synthetic intelligence arriving at
sentience or sapiens in whatever way
must care deeply about Humanity us
specifically as the subject and object
of its knowing it and its
desire the real
nightmare worse than
the the one in which the big machine
wants to sorry I wanted to dist start
the worst nightmare worse than the one
in which the big machine wants to kill
you is the one in which it sees you as
irrelevant not even as a discreet thing
to
know worse than being seen as an enemy
is not being seen at all
or as elazer yurkowski puts it the AI
does not hate you it does not love you
but you are made out of atoms that it
can use for something
else and so one of the inter integral
accidents essential accidents of the
stack may be an anthroid trauma that
shifts us from the design career as the
authors of the anthropos scine to the
role of supporting actors in the arrival
of the post anthropos scine the saticon
may also be black because we cannot see
our own reflection in
it in the last instance its acceleration
as geopolitics is less eschatological
than chemical because its grounding of
time is based Less on the premise of
historical dialectics than on the rot of
isotope
Decay it's drawn I Believe by an inhuman
and inhuman molecular form
Finding pre Cambrian Flora changed into
Pete oil changed into children's toys
dinosaurs changed into Birds changed
into ceremonial
headdresses computation itself converted
into whatever meta machine comes next
and stack into stack to come thank you
[Applause]